---
layout: post
title: "The Revolution is Coming, and it Will Be Televised"
---

Back in 1998 I was 15 years old.  I have this very clear memory of reading online and learning what an MP3 file was.  Shortly thereafter, I remember scouring the internet trying to download MP3 files.  Then one day at my High School someone showed me this thing called Napster.  It made downloading MP3 simple, fast and easy.  It disrupted the way music was distributed to consumers.

Later in 1998 I saw the "Rio PMP300":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rio_PMP300, more commonly known as the Rio Diamond.  It was the first real commercially well-received personal MP3 player.  At the time I was burning my MP3s to CDs to listen to in my CD player.  When I saw that the Rio could hold MP3 files itself and I could play them off the device, I promptly put down $160 at my local Circuit City.

Even though it only had 32MB of storage space, I remember thinking at the time that the Diamond Rio and this whole MP3 player thing was a game changer.  Why would anyone still buy CDs, let alone carry around a CD player?  The entire experience using an MP3 player was _so much better_.  It had longer battery life, was smaller, had no moving parts and no physical media to worry about.  I could tell that this was the start of something big.  220 million iPods later, I think I was on to something.

Flash-forward to 2005. After some extensive reading online, I modded my original XBOX and installed XBMC(XBOX Media Center).  This was another "Rio Diamond" moment for me.  Watching videos with XMBC on the TV was such a better experience than messing with codecs and trying to watch things on my computer.  I simply browsed the XBMC interface to the video file and it magically played on my TV through the XBOX.

It's now 2011 and XBMC has become quite popular.  You can "read all about it on Wikipedia":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XBMC.  It powers "Boxee":http://www.boxee.tv/ and "Plex":http://www.plexapp.com/, the latter of which is installed on my Mac Mini sitting in my entertainment center right now.  Plex is nice because it has a robust iOS app, which allows me to watch all my downloaded content on my iPad or iPhone, as well as start it playing on my Mac Mini connected to my TV.

Plex is great because it organizes and tags my media.  It is able to discern from my video files what the content is.  I.e., this is Season 5 episode 8 of _Dirty Jobs_ or this is the movie _Superbad_.  Plex presents all this media in a highly organized way, in a gorgeous UI.  For example, here is the movie "2001: A Space Odyssey":http://cdn2.afterdawn.fi/screenshots/normal/1152.jpg and "Band of Brothers":http://rogersmj.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/plex.jpg.

I mostly watch TV content, and get my media via BitTorrent and a private community tracker.  The Torrent website allows me to have an RSS feed of shows that I like.  I have software on my Mini to automatically download the torrent files from RSS, where my torrent app then automatically starts the download for me.  I get Growl notifications for this as well, which pop up on the screen as I'm watching other content.  Oh, and Plex has a Netflix application, so I can watch my Netflix movies on it as well.

This is a way better TV experience than cable or even my cable + a DVR.  All the video files are edited for commercials, and organized in a gorgeous UI.  All the noise of normal TV (commercials, the guide, channel surfing) is stripped out.  I only watch what I want to watch when I want to watch it.  If it wasn't for live TV or sports, or the fact my Girlfriend's shows are not available for download, I would probably drop cable TV entirely.

So at the end of all this I'm left asking the same question I had when I bought by Diamond Rio over a dozen years ago: why would anyone still have cable and watch TV the "old way" ever again?

I'll let "Steve Jobs explain":http://www.geek.com/articles/apple/what-you-need-to-know-about-steve-jobs-talk-at-d8-2010062/.  He was asked recently why Apple TV is a "hobby product" to Apple and how come they aren't disrupting the TV market like they did with the iPod.  This is the rough paraphrased answer from the link above, but it's missing some key content so I encourage you to watch the video for the full explanation:

bq. The problem with innovation in the TV industry is the go-to-market strategy. The TV industry has a subsidized model that gives everyone a set-top box for free, or for $10 per month That pretty much squashes any opportunity for innovation, because nobody’s willing to buy a set top box. Ask TiVo, ask Roku, ask us...ask Google in a few months. The only way that’s ever going to change is if you can really go back to square one, tear up the set top box, redesign it from scratch with a consistent UI across all these different functions, and get it to consumers in a way that they’re willing to pay for it. And right now there’s no way to do that.

bq. The TV is going to lose until there’s a better -- until there’s a viable -- go to market strategy. Otherwise you’re just making another Tivo. It’s not a problem with technology, not a problem with vision, it’s a fundamental go to market problem. And then it not like there’s a GSM standard where you build a phone for the US and it also works in all these other countries. No, every single country has different standards, different government approvals, it’s very...Tower of Bableish. No, balkanized. I’m sure smarter people than us will figure this out, but that’s why we say Apple TV a hobby; that’s why we use that phrase.

Content producers like TV studios and stations control the entire TV industry because they control the content.  They've created this market where customers pay for the content (subsidized by commercials) and get the hardware for free.  But by getting the hardware for free, they've stifled any innovation and advancement downstream from content production.

Only through the magic of open-source software has innovation happened.  XBMC is an amazing piece of software and is getting easier and easier to use very day.  At the same time, downloading TV is now easier than ever and still getting easier.  It's only a matter of time before someone makes the "Napster for TV shows."  People are already dropping their cable for Hulu and Netflix.

It's only a matter of time before things change.